update: macOS Section (#2702)
privacyguides/privacyguides.org: docs/os/macos-overview.md

macOS performs online checks when you open an app to verify whether an app contains known malware, and whether the developer’s signing certificate is revoked.

> Apple's OCSP service uses HTTPS encryption, so only they are able to see which apps you open. They've [posted information](https://support.apple.com/HT202491) about their logging policy for this service.

Reviewer: > as to only focus on the current state of the software

This doesn't seem like a justification to remove, since the reason it's mentioned is to explicitly call out a privacy-related function that is _missing_ from the current state of the software.

The absence _is_ the current state, so I'd be fine with the first change (removing outdated, historical information) while keeping the last sentence as-is:

```suggestion
Apple's OCSP service uses HTTPS encryption, so only they are able to see which apps you open. They've [posted information](https://support.apple.com/HT202491) about their logging policy for this service. They additionally promised to add a mechanism for people to opt-out of this online check, but this has not been added to macOS as of August 2024.
```

Author: Maybe "there isn't currently a mechanism to opt out of these checks"? I don't really care about promises, they mean nothing until it's actually in the OS.

> While you [can](https://eclecticlight.co/2021/02/23/how-to-run-apps-in-private) manually opt out of this check relatively easily, we recommend against doing so unless you would be badly compromised by the revocation checks performed by macOS, because they serve an important role in ensuring compromised apps are blocked from running.

Reviewer 2: In the team chat, you emphasized the importance of OCSP checks to block malicious apps for which Apple revoked their certificates.

I think that this sentence can start out with talking about the importance of this feature, then you can mention the edge case for disabling the check.

> badly compromised by the revocation checks

Because I'm not sure what this concretely entails

Author: Basically just means there's a longer period of time before your system would recognize the app as malicious.

### MAC Address Randomization

macOS uses a randomized MAC address when performing Wi-Fi scans while disconnected from a network.

You can set your MAC address to be randomized per network and rotate occasionally to prevent tracking between networks and on the same network over time.

> Go to **System Settings** > **Network** > **Wi-Fi** > **Details** and set **Private Wi-FI address** to either **Fixed** if you want a fixed random address for each network or **Rotating** if you want it to change over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to **System Settings** > **Network** > **Wi-Fi** > **Details** and set **Private Wi-FI address** to either **Fixed** if you want a fixed but unique address for the network you're connected to, or **Rotating** if you want it to change over time.
```

AFAIK this is set on a per network basis, you're not setting a default.

Whether it _defaults_ to Fixed or Rotating (or possibly even Off) [seems to depend on the network](https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2024/09/macos-15-sequoia-the-ars-technica-review/18/#:~:text=Apple%20says%20that%20the%20default%20settings%20are%20%22based%20on%20the%20type%20of%20network%20a%20device%20is%20connected%20to.%22) according to some Apple magic that is unclear to me.

I don't know if we want to note that fact?

##### App Sandbox

On macOS, whether an app is sandboxed is determined by the developer when they sign it. The App Sandbox protects against vulnerabilities in the apps you run by limiting what a malicious actor can do in the event that the app is exploited. The App Sandbox *alone* can't protect against [:material-package-variant-closed-remove: Supply Chain Attacks](../basics/common-threats.md#attacks-against-certain-organizations){ .pg-viridian } by malicious developers. For that, sandboxing needs to be enforced by someone other than the developer themselves, as it is on the App Store.

<div class="admonition warning" markdown>
<p class="admonition-title">Warning</p>

Software downloaded from outside the official App Store is not required to be sandboxed. If your threat model prioritizes defending against [:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks](../basics/common-threats.md#security-and-privacy){ .pg-orange }, then you may want to check if the software you download outside the App Store is sandboxed, which is up to the developer to *opt in*.

</div>

You can check if an app uses the App Sandbox in a few ways:

> You can check if apps that are already running are sandboxed using the [Activity Monitor](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/app_sandbox/protecting_user_data_with_app_sandbox#4098972).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can check if apps that are already running are sandboxed using the [Activity Monitor](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/protecting-user-data-with-app-sandbox#Verify-that-your-app-uses-App-Sandbox).
```
The suggested link brings readers directly to the section pertaining to Activity Monitor which includes a helpful graphic.

##### App Sandbox

> On macOS, whether an app is sandboxed is determined by the developer when they sign it. The App Sandbox protects against vulnerabilities in the apps you run by limiting what a malicious actor can do in the event that the app is exploited. The App Sandbox *alone* can't protect against [:material-package-variant-closed-remove: Supply Chain Attacks](../basics/common-threats.md#attacks-against-certain-organizations){ .pg-viridian } by malicious developers. For that, sandboxing needs to be enforced as it is on the App Store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On macOS, whether an app is sandboxed is determined by the developer when they sign it. The App Sandbox protects against vulnerabilities in the apps you run by limiting what a malicious actor can do in the event that the app is exploited. The App Sandbox *alone* can't protect against [:material-package-variant-closed-remove: Supply Chain Attacks](../basics/common-threats.md#attacks-against-certain-organizations){ .pg-viridian } by malicious developers. For that, sandboxing needs to be enforced by someone other than the developer themselves, as it is on the App Store.
```

this is maybe more clear?

<div class="admonition warning" markdown>
<p class="admonition-title">Warning</p>

Software downloaded from outside the official App Store is not required to be sandboxed. If your threat model prioritizes defending against [:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks](../basics/common-threats.md#security-and-privacy){ .pg-orange }, then you may want to check if the software you download outside the App Store is sandboxed, which is up to the developer to *opt in*.

</div>

You can check if an app uses the App Sandbox in a few ways:

You can check if apps that are already running are sandboxed using the [Activity Monitor](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/app_sandbox/protecting_user_data_with_app_sandbox#4098972).

<div class="admonition warning" markdown>
<p class="admonition-title">Warning</p>

Just because one of an app's processes is sandboxed doesn't mean they all are.

</div>

Alternatively, you can check apps before you run them by running this command in the terminal:

``` zsh
% codesign -dvvv --entitlements - <path to your app>
```

If an app is sandboxed, you should see

``` zsh
    [Key] com.apple.security.app-sandbox
    [Value]
        [Bool] true
```

> If you find that the app you want to run is not sandboxed, then you may employ methods of [compartmentalization](../basics/common-threats.md#security-and-privacy) such as virtual machines or separate devices, use a similar app that is sandboxed, or choose to not use the unsandboxed app altogether.
> ##### Hardened Runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you find that the app you want to run is not sandboxed, then you may employ methods of [compartmentalization](../basics/common-threats.md#security-and-privacy) such as virtual machines or separate devices, use a similar app that is sandboxed, or choose to not use the unsandboxed app altogether.

##### Hardened Runtime
```

##### App Sandbox

> On macOS, whether an app is sandboxed is determnined by the developer when they sign it. The App Sandbox protects against vulnerabilities in the apps you run by limiting what a malicious actor can do in the even that the app is exploited. It can't protect against malicious developers. For that, sandboxing needs to be enforced as it is on the App Store.

Reviewer 2: > limiting what a malicious actor can do

I think you expanded on this in the team chat and it should be put on the page

> For one sandboxed apps can’t access external data without user permission
> It [malicious apps] can just do whatever it wants basically outside of certain things protected by TCC like the camera
And like certain folders like documents and desktop

https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/app_sandbox/protecting_user_data_with_app_sandbox

This can also be linked in the Further Reading/Sources section.

macOS apps submitted to the App Store after June 1, 2012 are required to be sandboxed using the [App Sandbox](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/app_sandbox).

<div class="admonition warning" markdown>
<p class="admonition-title">Warning</p>

> Software downloaded from outside the official App Store is not required to be sandboxed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Software downloaded from outside the official App Store is not required to be sandboxed. If your threat model prioritizes defending against [:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks](basics/common-threats.md#security-and-privacy){ .pg-orange }, then you may want to check if the software you download outside the App Store is sandboxed, which is up to the developer to *opt-in*.
```

</div>

You can check if an app uses the App Sandbox in a few ways:

You can check if apps that are already running are sandboxed using the [Activity Monitor](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/app_sandbox/protecting_user_data_with_app_sandbox#4098972).

<div class="admonition warning" markdown>
<p class="admonition-title">Warning</p>

Just because one of an app's processes is sandboxed doesn't mean they all are.

</div>

> You can check apps before you run them with the command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can check apps before you run them by running this command in the terminal:
```
You can replace "terminal" with the proper name of the console on macOS.

Author: It is called the terminal in macOS

``` zsh
% codesign -dvvv --entitlements - <path to your app>
```

If an app is sandboxed, you should see

``` zsh
    [Key] com.apple.security.app-sandbox
    [Value]
        [Bool] true
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

If you find that the app you want to run is not sandboxed, then you may employ [methods of compartmentalization](../basics/common-threats.md#security-and-privacy) such as virtual machines or separate devices, use a similar app that is sandboxed, or choose to not use the unsandboxed app altogether.
```

##### Hardened Runtime

The [Hardened Runtime](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/hardened_runtime) is an extra protection for apps that prevents certain classes of exploits. It improves the security of apps against exploitation by disabling certain features like JIT.

> You can check if an app uses the Hardened Runtime using the command

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this section needs to be here after our last convo, unless there's an obvious footgun that allows people to disable this, which you would like to emphasize **not to do**

> However gatekeeper enforces hardened runtime
People are less likely to run an app when gatekeeper blocks them
And it’s not something you have to go out of you’ll way to check
In fact really it doesn’t apply on second thought
It’s enforced by gatekeeper my bad
In the same way the app store enforces the sandbox

Author: Yeah Gatekeeper is easily by passable as it is now, I think in the beta they're taking about the easy bypass and giving you a setting to disable it. So I'd like to keep this part in, maybe elaborate on that a bit. Also it only applies to apps and not other binaries.

##### App Sandbox

On macOS, whether an app is sandboxed is determined by the developer when they sign it. The App Sandbox protects against vulnerabilities in the apps you run by limiting what a malicious actor can do in the event that the app is exploited. The App Sandbox *alone* can't protect against [:material-package-variant-closed-remove: Supply Chain Attacks](../basics/common-threats.md#attacks-against-certain-organizations){ .pg-viridian } by malicious developers. For that, sandboxing needs to be enforced as it is on the App Store.

macOS apps submitted to the App Store after June 1, 2012 are required to be sandboxed using the [App Sandbox](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/app_sandbox).

<div class="admonition warning" markdown>
<p class="admonition-title">Warning</p>

> Software downloaded from outside the official App Store is not required to be sandboxed. If your threat model prioritizes defending against [:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks](basics/common-threats.md#security-and-privacy){ .pg-orange }, then you may want to check if the software you download outside the App Store is sandboxed, which is up to the developer to *opt-in*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Software downloaded from outside the official App Store is not required to be sandboxed. If your threat model prioritizes defending against [:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks](../basics/common-threats.md#security-and-privacy){ .pg-orange }, then you may want to check if the software you download outside the App Store is sandboxed, which is up to the developer to *opt-in*.
```

> Software downloaded from outside the official App Store is not required to be sandboxed. If your threat model prioritizes defending against [:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks](../basics/common-threats.md#security-and-privacy){ .pg-orange }, then you may want to check if the software you download outside the App Store is sandboxed, which is up to the developer to *opt-in*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Software downloaded from outside the official App Store is not required to be sandboxed. If your threat model prioritizes defending against [:material-bug-outline: Passive Attacks](../basics/common-threats.md#security-and-privacy){ .pg-orange }, then you may want to check if the software you download outside the App Store is sandboxed, which is up to the developer to *opt in*.
```

    [Value]
        [Bool] true
```

> ##### Hardened Runtime

Reviewer: This and the sandboxing section feel a little unnecessary to me. If the results are no, as they will be in most cases, what is the reader supposed to do about that?

We should try to add actionable advice in both of these sections.

Author: hmm? They should know if it's sandboxed or not. Then they can decide if they want to run it, run in a VM, etc.
